---
layout: post
title: GCD 2014 Meeting overview
published: true
tags: science
categories: science
date: 2014-09-21 00:19:00
---

I spent most of last week at the [Genomics of Common Diseases](http://www.nature.com/natureconferences/gcd2014/index.html) meeting held by Nature Genetics and the Wellcome Trust. Below I summarize some of the big themes of the conference, and give the big takeaway message I got from each of the talks.

## Big themes

Before the meeting, Orli Bahcall presented a list of "big questions" regarding the state and future of genomics of common diseases. While going through the questions and absorbing the talks, I came up with the following big themes:

#### Challenges in discovery and interpretation of susceptibility loci
Clearly, GWAS has made a lot of progress in identifying genetic variants associated with disease. We saw many examples of this, including from Martin Tobin in COPD, from Peter Gregerson in rheumatoid arthritis, and from Judy Cho in IBD. GWAS methods have become pretty solid, and sample sizes are continuously expanding to allow large meta-analyses to identify more and more susceptibility loci (see the [recent progress in schizophrenia](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v511/n7510/full/nature13595.html) for example). Clearly, **one of the big challenges going forward will be in interpreting genetic associations and determine the biology driving them**.

Speakers highlighted several ways we can improve association studies and gain better insight into the genetic architecture of disease:
* **The importance of phenotyping**: If we choose the right phenotype, we can increase our power and effect sizes in association tests. Tobin showed how correctly stratifying patient groups, in his case smokers and non-smokers with COPD, can be helpful. Gregerson and Cho emphasized better use of molecular "endophenotypes", such as biomarkers associated disease, which may give stronger associations than more heterogeneous disease phenotypes. For instance, in a study on IBD, Cho looked at the more specific phenotype of mycobaecterial infection. In a study on rheumatoid arthritis, Gregerson looked at immunological quantitative traits.

* **Integrating datasets for better interpretation**
We are now generating tons of datasets, including transcriptomics, proteomics, epigenomics, transcription factor binding maps, and more. A key to GWAS interpretation will be integrating these datasets on top of association results, as pointed out by Nancy Cox. For example, Huyghe showed that GWAS SNPs act as eQTLs in relevant disease tissues, and we can use such overlaps to learn about function and tissue specificity. Several posters integrated functional datasets to interpret specific GWAS loci. 

* **Better understanding of underlying processes: genetic architecture and mutation**
We still do not fully understand the genetic architecture of many complex traits. Is most heritability due to rare variants? common variants? interactions we don't account for? The answer is likely to be different across different traits. Vineeta Agarwala dug into a specific locus, 9p21 implicated across an impressive array of different diseases, to investigate which variants are driving an association with Type 2 Diabetes. She asked whether rare variants on common haplotypes could explain the signal, and concluded that common, not rare, variants are likely the causal loci. This is just one example, and we still have a lot to learn about the architecture both behind GWAS variants and behind genetic variance not yet accounted for by association tests.

To better assess the relevance of mutations, it is important to have quantitative models that give us better understanding of mutation processes. Molly Przeworksi's keynote emphasized that there are still many key aspects of the point mutation process that we don't understand. David Goldstein stressed the importance of having an accurate null model when interpreting *de novo* mutations. Rebecca Rothwell presented a model of mitochondrial transmission. Gil McVean presented on one of my favorite topics: how can we study the whole spectrum of mutation events, including repeats and larger structural variants, not just point mutations? He suggested assembly based approaches for doing this, focusing on some results from plasmodium. While most of these talks did not relate directly to studies of human disease, as Gil pointed out, mutations are at the heart of what we study and it's important to understand how they work.

---

There have been some heroic efforts to track down individual GWAS hits all the way down to the causal variant and its mechanism. For instance, Hoskins tracked down a GWAS hit for pancreatic cancer risk down to an indel that creates a novel binding site that represses a distant gene through long range interaction. These efforts are an extremely important next step in GWAS. Yet, tracking down each of these loci is a huge task. To make progress on a large scale forward, I think we're going to have to develop comprehensive computational methods for performing this on a large scale. A large part of this will be integrating many layers of genomics datasets, mentioned above. But I'm personally excited by the following classes of methods that will help generate meaningful predictions about the effects of variants:

* **Heritability partitioning**
TODO
- partition h2, cell type spec. (hilary, some other posters)

* **Predicting functional effects of specific variants**
TODO
- cox (predict expr -> gwas)
- dongwon's poster

#### A need for better infrastructure for genomics data sharing

As David Altshuler pointed out, **in many cases to understand a single genome, we need to have access to the genomes of hundreds, thousands, or millions of people**. He mentioned the cases of rare mutations in families, estimating penetrance, ethnic diversity, and cancer. We are now capable of approaching sample sizes of this scale. It is not news that genomics is now generating tons of data. We saw presentations from large projects including the [GTEx](http://www.gtexportal.org/home/), [1000 Genomes](http://www.1000genomes.org/), and [Genomics England's 100K Genomes Project](http://www.genomicsengland.co.uk/), plus a talk by Teri Manolio about many different clinical genomics projcts from around the world. In a talk titled "Big Data: Transforming Cancer Research and Care", Lynda Chin presented work on enormous datasets that included genomic, transcriptomic, epigenomic, and more data from many cancer patients. She emphasized the need to develop resources to crowdsource analysis to maximize use of these datasets.

While many of the datasets mentioned above and elsewhere are available publicly or with approved access, it is still difficult to ask questions like “at this location in the genome, what fraction of people have allele A” or “across all eQTL studies ever done, what is the effect of this variant.” While it is possible to answer some of these questions, it requires a huge amount of logistics to query many diverse datasets. If all publicly available genomics data was accessible and query-able within the same "interoperable framework", it would be much easier to ask these kinds of questions and would make existing datasets much more powerful. This is a major goal of the [Global Alliance for Genomics and Health](http://genomicsandhealth.org/), and I think its importance should be emphasized.

#### Genome Editing
Although this topic did not come up as much as I expected during the meeting, clearly **one of the most transformative new technologies in genomics is the ability to precisely edit genomes in place** with the use of the CRISPR-Cas9 system. Feng Zhang gave a great overview of the technology, and some exciting new developments they are working on. He was followed by Kiran Musunuru who talked about using CRISPR to follow up a specific GWAS locus.

This technology obviously has tons of use cases. For the first time, instead of just identifying associations, we can directly assess the effects of specific variants within their original genomic context. This will allow us to validate and study effects of GWAS loci and QTLs, easily generate gene knock-outs in tissue-specific models, and more. However, there are still many challenges. Musunuru pointed out issues in throughput: he wants to test all variants at a GWAS locus. Performing separate CRISPR experiments on each variant using current methods would be a huge task. Instead, he outlined a plan where he will generate a pooled library of guide RNAs for each mutation in a cell line with his gene of interest tagged with GFP. He will then assay expression using FACs and analyze extremes of the distribution fo determine variants leading to increases and decreases in expression. I think this is the direction we need to be thinking. His example is only for a single locus. Imagine now that we'd like to interrogate variants at thousands of loci across the genome. There are still technical challenges, such as isolating specific populations of cells that received specific CRISPR edits, that make genome editing on such a large scale infeasible.

#### Challenges in bringing genomics to the clinic

Two key areas were discussed regarding what needs to happen to make clinical genomics a reality:

* **(1) Interpretation of variants**
TODO
- key idea of *penetrance* rarely see fully penetrant variant in complex
disease. crucial to also look at individuals *without*
the phenotype which have that variant.  (deCODE talk is key, Altshuler
global alliance)

* **(2) Better infrastructure for integrating genomics into health care **
TODO
- howard jacob: future of clinical sequencing (apple watch joke)
- UK doing a lot better than us...
- infrastructure, Altshuler, UK 100K (hubbard)

## Big messages from each talk
Note a couple are missing, mostly because some were closed to social media, but a couple of them I wasn't in the room for, sorry!

* **Bert Vogelstein (keynote)**
Deaths from cardiovascular disease over the last 60 years have
decreased about 70%, while deaths from cancer have stayed
stagnant. Why? Vogelstein suggests this is because most funding for
cancer research has focused on curing advanced cancers, but the most
promise for impact comes from *prevention* and *early detection*.

* **Lynda Chin**
We are generating overwhelmingly large cancer genomics datasets: whole genome
sequencing, transcriptomics, proteomics, and scores of epigenetic
marks. We need to make better visualization and data resources to
crowdsource analyses of these data to maximize its utility.

* **Jason Hoskins**
Hoskins tackles the important task of following up a GWAS hit for predisposition to pancreatic
cancer all the way to the causal variant and mechanism. He finds a
double insertion event tagged by the GWAS hit that forms a novel
binding site for LEF1 that silences DIS3 through long range interaction.

* **Brad Bernstein**
Berstein uses high throughput and single cell genomics to find the
factors driving stemness in glioblastomas.

* **Martin Tobin**
Lung function and COPD are highly heritable conditions, and
associations found by GWAS explain only a small portion of the genetic
variance. By smartly stratifying cohorts (here non-smokers
vs. smokers) we can gain better insight into variants contributing to
the disease.

* **Peter Gregersen**
"Phenotype. phenotype. phenotype." Focusing on rheumatoid arthritis, Gregersen emphasizes that often
disease phenotypes can be very heterogenous. We can increase our power
and effect sizes by looking at more homogenous phenotypes, such as
molecule "endophenotypes" underlying the disease.

* **Judy Cho**
Cho also emphasizes, this time in IBD, that a key to GWAS success is
identifying the correct molecular endophenotype. She identifies links
between IBD and mycobacterial susceptibility.

* **Eric Green (keynote)**
Eric Green expresses optimism about the future of genomic medicine,
and gives his 6 hottest areas upcoming areas of importance: (1) cancer
genomics, (2) pharmacogenomics, (3) genomic medicine "test drive"
programs, (4) prenatal and newborn genomic analysis, (5) clinical
genomics information systems, and (6) ultra-rare disease genomics.

* **Matthew Maurano**
Deep sequencing of DNaseI hypersensitivity sites and other molecular
phenotypes elucidates widespread allelic imbalance and shows cell type
specific differences in the genome's regulatory architecture.

* **Nancy Cox**
In order for us to accurately translate a variant into patient care,
we will need to integrate data from a large number of sources, which
by themselves have no clinical utility. Cox also presents a clever
approach of using genotypes to predict gene expression, then
associated expression levels directly with disease phenotypes to gain
insight into key genes related to disease.

* **Simona Volpi**
The GTEx project is generating large datasets of genotype and
expression data across many individuals in an large range of tissue
types that will serve as a valuable resource for interpreting the
effect of genetic variants.

* **Jeroen Huyghe**
Integrating GWAS hits with functional data will be a key to
interpretation. GWAS SNPs from Type 2 Diabetes alter expression in
relevant tissues of liver, pancreas, and skeletal muscle.

* **Howard Jacob**
"The future of common disease: phenotype with your apple watch, plus
sequencing in the clinic". Jacob claims the future of clinical
sequencing lies in whole genome, rather than whole exome sequencing,
which should capture a larger range of relevant variation.

* **Hreinn Stefannson (deCODE)**
Most association studies study the effect of a variant on individuals
*with a certain phenotype*. However, this does not allow us to answer
the question of penetrance. Here deCODE looks at how CNVs implicated in
schizophrenia and autism behave in normal control samples. They find
that these CNVs significantly affect cognitive function in controls,
separate from the manifest disease.

* **David Goldstein**
*De novo* mutations are in clear excess in patients arriving at the
genetics clinic. To evaluate the significance of these, it is
important to have an accurate null model of *de novo* mutation.

* **Leslie Biesecker**
A key objection to using sequencing results in the clinic is that the
penetrance of most variants is unknown. Currently, reported variants
suffer from a high false positive rate. Biesecker claims that we have
been underestimating the prior probability of disease, and that by
more accurately estimating this we may be able to boost the positive
predictive value of mutations returned by these tests.

* **David Hinds (23andMe)**
23andMe have collected a large genetic dataset from a diverse set of
Americans. Through online surveys, they achieve striking GWAS results
for such traits as "do you cry easily" and "are you a morning person".

* **Yaniv Erlich**
Using an awesome analysis of a 43 million person pedigree obtained
using social media, Erlich showed that the overwhelmingly best model
for the genetic architecture of longevity is an additive
model.

* **Vinneta Agarwala**
Are "synthetic associations", or rare variants on common haplotypes,
driving GWAS signals? Agarwala finds no evidence of this at the 9p21 locus implicated
in Type 2 Diabetes, suggesting the signal is due primarily to common
variants.

* **Hilary Finucane**
Using a novel statistical genetics metric, the LD score, we can more
accurately measure the heritability of polygenic traits, and can
partition heritability between different functional annotations.

* **Teri Manolio**
Manolio describes growing genomic medicine initiatives from around the
world. 

* **Tim Hubbard**
UK is sequencing 100,000 clinical grade genomes with a focus on rare
inherited diseases, cancer, and pathogens. This project will be
directly integrated with the health care system, and aims to develop
important infrastructure for integrating sequencing into health care.

* **David Altshuler**
To fully understand the genomics of many diseases, we will need to
look across hundreds of thousands or even millions of genomes. No
single institute has the capacity for this, and a key element of
progress will be to ensure interoperability of genomics data across
many institutions worldwide. Unless we take action, genomics data will
become "balkanized" in different silos. The Global Alliance seeks to
advance interoperability of genomics data by developing important ethical and
technical frameworks.

* **Steve Munger**
Many mouse studies are done using the Black 6 strain, and are found
not to recapitulate human responses. However, this
strain behaves like an outlier strain in many respects. At Jackson
Laboratory, they are creating an outbred mouse strain from 8 founder
strains to allow more complex studies of genotype-phenotype
relationships in mice.

* **Feng Zhang**
CRISPR-Cas9 allows precise genome-editing. It can be used for a huge
variety of genomics applications, including generating genome-scale
knockout libraries and editing specific genomic variants. Zhang's
group developed a cre-dependent Cas9 mouse, allowing cell-type
specific Cas9 expression and genome editing.

* **Kiran Musunuru**
In associated genotype to phenotype, we need to address four key
questions: (1) what is the causal variant? (2) How do we link the
causal variant to a gene? (3) What is the causal gene? (4) How do we
relate the causal gene to the phenotype? Musunuru is following up a
GWAS hit for Type 2 Diabetes and HDL in KLF14 using a CRISPR screen to
cover all of the variants at this locus.

* **Molly Przeworksi (keynote)**
There are a lot of basic properties of the human mutation process that
we still don't understand. Recent studies have estimated the germline
mutation rate using different methods, including looking at disease
related genes, phylogenetic relationships, and deep sequencing
trios, each of which gives different estimates. Przeworksi presents a
model accounting for mutation repair rates, paternal age, and
generating time and shows how it could reconcile estimates from
different methods.

* **Gil McVean**
Many germline mutations are not simple point mutations. How can we
access the full spectrum of de novo mutations? McVean looks at
plasmodium genomes using an assembly based approach to study all types
of variation in a hypothesis free way.

* **Joanna Mountain (23andme)**
23andme looks at the genetic landscape of individuals across the
US. Using data from its large user-base, they can infer different
ancestry components in diverse populations including Latinos, African
Americans, and Americans of European descent.

* **Rebecca Rothwell**
Rothwell develops a method of mitochondrial transmission in
humans. She shows that a "nucleoid model", in which groups of 5-10
mitochondria replicate as a unit, fits best to current data.

* **Julie Segre**
Segre shows the use of PacBio and Illumina sequencing technologies to
track outbreaks of hospital acquired infections.

